feat: Introduce K/V Context Quantisation (vRAM improvements) (#6279)
ollama/ollama: docs/faq.md

Ollama runs an HTTP server and can be exposed using a proxy server such as Nginx. To do so, configure the proxy to forward requests and optionally set required headers (if not exposing Ollama on the network). For example, with Nginx:

> ```nginx

Reviewer: Ah awesome, thanks.

## How can I set the quantization type for the K/V cache?

The K/V context cache can be quantized to significantly reduce memory usage when Flash Attention is enabled.

You can set the quantization type in a number of ways:

1. In the environment using `OLLAMA_CACHE_TYPE_K` and `OLLAMA_CACHE_TYPE_V` which will be the default vault for all models loaded.
2. In a model's Modelfile using the `cache_type_k` and `cache_type_v` parameters which will be loaded with the model.
3. In the CLI with `/set parameter cache_type_k <value>` and `/set parameter cache_type_v <value>` which will be used for that session.

While there are [a number of quantization types available](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp/pull/7527), the most common you might want to choose are:

> - `f16` - high precision and memory usage (default).

Reviewer: Let's limit to `f16`, `q8_0` and `q4_0` - my worry is that setting these would sometimes cause crashes (might be fixed now). Also limiting to 4-bit, 8-bit and 16-bit makes it easy to adopt future backends later

Author: No worries, will make that change shortly

Author: Done, I also added that f32 is technically an option (although I'm not sure why you'd want to run it?)

Reviewer: Thanks! Yes f32 should just be the default as it is today

## How does Ollama load models on multiple GPUs?

Installing multiple GPUs of the same brand can be a great way to increase your available VRAM to load larger models.  When you load a new model, Ollama evaluates the required VRAM for the model against what is currently available.  If the model will entirely fit on any single GPU, Ollama will load the model on that GPU.  This typically provides the best performance as it reduces the amount of data transfering across the PCI bus during inference.  If the model does not fit entirely on one GPU, then it will be spread across all the available GPUs.

## How can I set the quantization type for the K/V cache?

> The K/V context cache can be quantized to significantly reduce memory usage when Flash Attention is enabled.

Reviewer: Does the KV cache only work with Flash Attention? Or in all cases?

Reviewer 2: No. Here is one example that requires being able to specify these individually:
DeepSeek - can not use flash attention, can only quantize the K cache, cannot quantize the V cache

Reviewer: Thanks!

Is that encoded anywhere in the model config/metadata? That way we could catch these edge cases at runtime vs erroring

Reviewer 2: Great question. I really don't know how this is being checked inside llama.cpp. It's likely a current limitation of llama.cpp rather than an issue with the model itself.

Reviewer 3: Do you think it would somehow be possible to set an automatic fallback where k or v cache falls back to f16 in the event of an error? 

Then it would just automatically switch k, v or both back to f16 when incompatible. 

That way it would just add a few seconds to load time while it reloads models properly so user wouldn't have to deal with errors or settings in these cases.

Reviewer 2: Not my software, but I wouldn't overcomplicate things. If the desired parameters aren't correct and the model fails to load I'd error out and fail to load the model. Here are a few reasons:

- Adding workaround code adds complexity
- The code may need to be changed if llama.cpp (or another) back end changes their ability to load the model under these conditions
- It may give the user the improper impression that the settings are working even though they were silently changed during runtime

If someone is advanced enough to be messing with these settings they should validate that they work correctly. That's even the case with "simple" settings like context length.

Reviewer 3: I think we could see that easily in logs if it was indeed functioning as intended, it would make it easier for end users and advanced users could easily double check it. 

But in the end just a suggestion, definitely not my software either. Haha

Author: Only with flash attention.

Author: Honestly I don’t understand why anyone would disable Flash Attention, I know a few older architecture models don’t support it but really it should always be enabled for models that do.

Reviewer: Awesome, thanks @sammcj ! Completely agree. Would love to turn it on by default (probably in a separate PR)! Only time we'd disable it would be for compatibility or if its unsupported.. do you know which models might (we can bring this to another issue/PR) support it by default?

Author: The only model I've personally encountered in recent times that don't support FA is deepseek-coder-v2(-lite), but the behaviour in Ollama as it is means if you have FA enabled and you run an older non-FA model - it will just disable FA which is nice behaviour.

I agree this could be done on another issue/PR, it's something that would greatly benifit folks that "just use" Ollama without tuning etc... as they would need far less vRAM to run any decent context size.

> To use quantized k/v cache with Ollama you can set the following environment variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use quantized K/V cache with Ollama you can set the following environment variables:
```

- `OLLAMA_CACHE_TYPE_K` - The quantization type for the key cache.  Default is `f16`.
- `OLLAMA_CACHE_TYPE_V` - The quantization type for the value cache.  Default is `f16`.

> Note: Currently this is a global option - meaning all models will run with the specified quantization type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: Currently this is a global option - meaning all models will run with the specified quantization type.
```

While there are [a number of quantization types available](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp/pull/7527), Ollama currently supports:

- `f32` - full precision and memory usage.
- `f16` - high precision and memory usage (default).
- `q8_0` - 8-bit quantization, uses approximately 1/2 the memory of `f16` with a very small loss in precision.
- `q4_0` - 4-bit quantization, uses approximately 1/4 the memory of `f16` with a small-medium loss in precision.

> If you're using an uncommon quant type, you may benefit from build Ollama with `LLAMA_CUDA_FA_ALL_QUANTS=1` to make llama.cpp build all flash attention quantization types.

Reviewer: Is this more or less documentation for `OLLAMA_FLASH_ATTENTION`? Good to know regardless

Author: Yeah you're probably right it applies to FA and K/V cache quantisation, I'll move it.

Author: Done, and documented the basic enabling of Flash Attention 🤣

## How can I enable Flash Attention?

Flash Attention is a feature of most modern models that can significantly reduce memory usage as the context size grows.  To enable Flash Attention, set the `OLLAMA_FLASH_ATTENTION` environment variable to `1` when starting the Ollama server.

## How can I set the quantization type for the K/V cache?

The K/V context cache can be quantized to significantly reduce memory usage when Flash Attention is enabled.

To use quantized K/V cache with Ollama you can set the following environment variable:

- `OLLAMA_KV_CACHE_TYPE` - The quantization type for the K/V cache.  Default is `f16`.

> Note: Currently this is a global option - meaning all models will run with the specified quantization type.

The currently available K/V cache quantization types are:

> - `f32` - full precision and memory usage.

Author: I agree it's not worth keeping f32, I only had it there as I didn't want to add any behavioural changes in when it's not used. I will remove.

> - `f32` - full precision and memory usage.

Reviewer: Awesome, thanks!

> There are [a number of quantization types available](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp/pull/7527), the most commonly used are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The currently available K/V cache quantization types are:
```

Reviewer: (also: was hard to edit this in the suggestion, but feel free to link out to more info if it's helpful)

## How does Ollama load models on multiple GPUs?

> Installing multiple GPUs of the same brand can be a great way to increase your available VRAM to load larger models.  When you load a new model, Ollama evaluates the required VRAM for the model against what is currently available.  If the model will entirely fit on any single GPU, Ollama will load the model on that GPU.  This typically provides the best performance as it reduces the amount of data transferring across the PCI bus during inference.  If the model does not fit entirely on one GPU, then it will be spread across all the available GPUs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When loading a new model, Ollama evaluates the required VRAM for the model against what is currently available.  If the model will entirely fit on any single GPU, Ollama will load the model on that GPU.  This typically provides the best performance as it reduces the amount of data transferring across the PCI bus during inference.  If the model does not fit entirely on one GPU, then it will be spread across all the available GPUs.
```

## How can I enable Flash Attention?

> Flash Attention is a feature of most (but not all) modern models that can significantly reduce memory usage as the context size grows.  To enable Flash Attention, set the `OLLAMA_FLASH_ATTENTION` environment variable to `1` when starting the Ollama server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flash Attention is a feature of most modern models that can significantly reduce memory usage as the context size grows.  To enable Flash Attention, set the `OLLAMA_FLASH_ATTENTION` environment variable to `1` when starting the Ollama server.
```

> > Note: Advanced users using CUDA may benefit from building Ollama and passing `GGML_CUDA_FA_ALL_QUANTS=1` to the llama.cpp build to enable FA for all combinations of quantization types. More information on this can be found in [llama.cpp](https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp/blob/fb4a0ec0833c71cff5a1a367ba375447ce6106eb/ggml/src/ggml-cuda/fattn-common.cuh#L575).

Reviewer: @sammcj do you know if `GGML_CUDA_FA_ALL_QUANTS` flag is required (or has any impact) to support the 4-bit and 8-bit FA quants we're limiting to below? If it has no impact should we remove this note?

Author: The documentation around that build flag's behaviour is ... "not great" 🤣,

I did some digging around on this previously and it seems to be based on the GGML head size.

I came to this conclusion (I'm not sure if it's 100% accurate):

head size = hidden_size/num_attention_heads

| Head Size | Supported K/V Combinations    |
|-----------|-------------------------------|
| 64        | f16/f16 only                  |
| 128       | q4_0/q4_0, q8_0/q8_0, f16/f16 |
| 256       | f16/f16 only                  |

Given most models head size of 128 it should be fine to leave out assuming Ollama is only going to allow Q4_0 or Q8_0 and is not allowing different quants for K vs V.

https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp/blob/master/ggml/src/ggml-cuda/fattn-common.cuh#L575

Author: I've removed mention of this from the FAQ for now.

## How does Ollama load models on multiple GPUs?

Installing multiple GPUs of the same brand can be a great way to increase your available VRAM to load larger models.  When you load a new model, Ollama evaluates the required VRAM for the model against what is currently available.  If the model will entirely fit on any single GPU, Ollama will load the model on that GPU.  This typically provides the best performance as it reduces the amount of data transferring across the PCI bus during inference.  If the model does not fit entirely on one GPU, then it will be spread across all the available GPUs.

## How can I enable Flash Attention?

Flash Attention is a feature of most (but not all) modern models that can significantly reduce memory usage as the context size grows.  To enable Flash Attention, set the `OLLAMA_FLASH_ATTENTION` environment variable to `1` when starting the Ollama server.

> > Note: If you're using an uncommon quantization type with CUDA, you may benefit from build Ollama with `LLAMA_CUDA_FA_ALL_QUANTS=1` to make llama.cpp build all flash attention quantization types.

Reviewer: Thanks for updating the docs here. Do you know, given the datatypes we have limited this PR to, whether `LLAMA_CUDA_FA_ALL_QUANTS` will add any benefit (or is it required)?

Author: I read the llama.cpp code as if you compile with LLAMA_CUDA_FA_ALL_QUANTS (actually I see this has been updated to GGML_CUDA_FA_ALL_QUANTS now) it allows you to mix and match combinations of quantisation types. https://github.com/ggerganov/llama.cpp/blob/fb4a0ec0833c71cff5a1a367ba375447ce6106eb/ggml/src/ggml-cuda/fattn-common.cuh#L575C1-L575C130

I'll update the docs to make that GGML_CUDA_FA_ALL_QUANTS

Author: Updated docs.
